We've been using various API is such as the metadata API to work with the database up until now.
By using these API as we've avoided directly querying the database however we're coming to the point
where we can't justify using API is for certain tasks.
We need full control over the database and in these next few lectures you'll see how to do just that.
One of the benefits of using API is that we didn't have to create tables or insert data while these
APIs are useful.
They don't provide us with everything we need.
Sometimes you will have to create complex custom queries.
Other times you'll have to create tables in this lecture.
We're going to create a database table.
This table will contain ratings for our recipes.
First we're going to create it through an interface and then learn how to create it with code.
I'm using Heidi Eskew well for this.
It's a really great program for communicating with sequel databases.
If you're comfortable with P feed my admin then by all means go ahead and use it.
If this is your first time using Heidi yes you well then I'll show you how to connect to your database
quickly for the hostname slash IP.
It should be 1 2 7 0 0 0 don't want the user name should be root and the password should be empty the
rest of the settings are just fine as is next.
You should just click open and you should see all your databases go to the database that contains your
wordpress installation you should see about eleven tables you may see more because plugins can and are
allowed to create more database tables before we create our own table.
Let's check out how WordPress creates tables open the WP underscore posts tables.
Wordpress is database design is very good.
WordPress tries its best to implement the best database practices and it shows here one thing you'll
notice is that for their I.D. is that they use the big integer type to allow for stealing and large
amounts of data.
It's always good practice to follow how WordPress designs their database.
This way you can remove any confusion if someone else takes a look at your own custom tables.
You'll also notice that every table starts with WP underscore this is very important to note down.
The goal right now is to create a table with Heidi Eskew ls help and you'll see why in a second to create
a table you'll have to click the database and select create new table.
From here we can begin defining the table.
I'm going to call a table WP underscore recipe underscore ratings and it should have four columns.
I'm going to pre fill these and then go over what you should set
positive video for a second and fill up the form just as I did.
We have four fields named i.e. recipe i.e. rating and user IP.
The ideas will be unique and we'll be setting it as our primary key to create a primary key.
You just right click and select create new index primary.
The type should be big int we use big ints as this is what WordPress uses for their own ideas.
The link should be 20 with auto increment as the default.
The recipe ideas will contain the ideas of the post.
This will also be the type big int with a length of 20.
The rating will contain the user rating along with their user IP.
Let's create our table now and you should receive no error so far.
Great.
The reason I had you create this table through Heidi Eskew well is because Heidi will generate the query
for us in two locations.
If you look at the bottom you'll notice all these sequel queries being executed.
It even has the create query.
However it's all compressed into this one line.
There is actually a more cleaner and formatted version which is available under this create code tab.
Copy this and make sure you have it in hand when we create this table view code.
I want to create this through our plugin and not through Heidi yes you Well let's open the activation
file and get started.
The first thing I want to do is include the global variable w PDB.
This variable contains an object with methods and properties for interacting with the database.
This object is created by WordPress for you and is already connected to the database.
I'm going to create a variable named create sequel and this will contain a string with our sequel.
Let's copy and paste the query from Heidi yes well into this string like so I'm going to format this
a bit by inventing some stuff just to make it look a little bit cleaner and readable.
We need to modify this query a bit to be compatible and consistent with our database.
First is the prefix not all installations of WordPress will be prefixed with WP underscore.
So I want you to remove this bit and instead we're going to append dynamic prefix the WP PDB object
contains a property named prefix and this property simply contain the prefix of the current wordpress
installation.
Next up is making the carousel dynamic.
The WP DV object has a method called get care set Coley as it sounds.
This will get the coalition of the currently installed database.
I'm going to modify this end of the query a little bit.
We don't have to make any further modifications to our sequel query.
All we have to do now is execute it.
You may be thinking that there is a method in the WP DB object for doing this but there isn't.
Strangely enough WordPress doesn't include a create table method.
Instead we have to use a different function.
I'm going to require a file called slash WP dash admin slash includes slash upgrade dot P. HP I also
appended this to a constant named Abas path.
This constant is created by Wordpress and points to the root installation of our WordPress site.
We have to include this file so we can use a function called DB Delta this file usually isn't loaded
so we have to load it the DB delta function is used for executing queries that modify the database and
the resource section I provide a link to this function.
If you take a look at the source code you'll find all this code that will assist us with creating a
database.
Here is what WordPress has to say about this function.
Useful for creating new tables and updating existing tables to a new structure.
I'm going to pass this function for our query.
That's it.
We're done.
I'm gonna go back to Heidi.
Yes you will.
And I'm going to drop the newly created table dropping a table is just another way of saying deleting
it back inside WordPress lets the activator plug in and then reactivated.
You should not get any errors.
Go back to Heidi yes you will and refresh the database.
You should see the recipe ratings table pop up again.
I know this can seem a bit confusing but working with the database is actually easier than this.
Ninety five percent of the time you won't have to worry about requiring certain files creating updating
and deleting tables requires the upgrade file.
The reason this file is required is because of security reasons.
It's not normal to load functions specifically made for updating creating and deleting tables on every
page request.
If this function was loaded everywhere then it would cause some serious security issues for web developers
and owners.
WordPress provides a lot of methods for executing queries and takes care of sanitizing your queries
for you.
So I promise creating a query like this is a one time thing.
If you're interested in learning more about this process then I provide a link to a wordpress developer
page that provides details about this.